hi this is a video talking about
Buddhism Buddhist philosophy how we know
what we think we know about Buddhism
from the study of ancient texts a small
number of people who come to this
YouTube channel are aware of my former
life as a scholar of terra-that of
Buddhism if you're not aware you can
figure out how to spell my name and put
it into Google and pretty quickly and
easily find articles and other fragments
from that life I lived um though it's a
small number of people who watch the
videos I make about Buddhism I'm aware
that those videos can have quite a big
impact on them I have had email from
people about the ways in which my videos
oh Buddhism have changed their lives
however the purpose of this YouTube
channel is not to preach Buddhism it's
not to critique Buddhism it's not to
talk about my former life and scholar
Buddhist studies this YouTube channel on
the one hand simply reflects whatever
I've got going on in the present tense
so for example when I was working on the
politics of China several videos were
uploaded here talking about Chinese
politics when I was learning Chinese as
a language I uploaded several videos
about the Chinese language so that type
of material is gonna change from month
to month depending on what I've got
going on in my life if I get a job at
Starbucks it's quite possible I will
start uploading videos talking about
what it's like to work fine together of
a Starbucks that's a thought man that
might be a nice change for me right here
unfortunately I'm vegan so it's not all
that much at Starbucks I can make
without a shudder of moral objection at
any rate uh look so on the one hand this
channel is about whatever's going on in
my life right now and on the other hand
this channel exists so that one day my
daughter can see it I have a
two-year-old daughter who lives in
Europe whom I basically never get to see
I'm hoping to see her this December and
you may get videos about that
but one day in the future she could know
what kind of guy I was so with all that
having been said look if you're watching
this and you have no idea why you should
pay attention to this bowl guy talking
about Buddhism it's understandable you
can do some Google searches I was
invited to give a lecture on Buddhism at
the University of Oxford at one point by
the great Richard Gombrich I was invited
to give a university at so as the
University of London
I actually took these invitations and
gave those lectures by the way if you
haven't guessed I also gave lectures on
Buddhism actually in academic contexts
in Cambodia and in Taiwan I remember
giving lectures on Buddhism two lectures
at a Buddhist University in Taiwan I
have never given a lecture at a
university in Canada not not formally
and when professors talk to me here of a
Buddhism they often are impressed after
a short discussion that I know so much I
have great depth of knowledge in the
field and depth of practical experience
and depth of useful cynical advice about
what's going on the field and I point
out to them well you know you could book
a room and you could invite me to give a
lecture here at the University of
Victoria or what have you
they don't do that so the type of
ambition Canadian institution has to
take advantage of the talent that it's
got the talent that's already on campus
it's very different from the way
American and British institutions
operate without even getting into the
question of actually getting out of your
chair and going and recruiting talent
from elsewhere anyway that's a
digression from within a digression this
video is going to read out and respond
to I'm going to add some spontaneous
comments to an article I wrote back in
the year 2012 this article is titled was
originally titled descent from the top
reading ancient Buddhist texts as
historical evidence so as many of my
writings my concern here is how we
construct modern myths out of ancient
myths and often how we convince
ourselves that in reading mythology we
are actually reading
isolated historical facts you know one
of the inoffensive examples I can give
of that and that I often do use in
conversation with people is the Greek
god Heracles and nobody gets offended
because nobody worships Heracles as a
God anymore but Heracles really was a
God
Heracles has to take it very seriously
historically as a major religious figure
which does not mean that he existed does
not mean we have any text or any
painting or any decorated urn showing
Heracles showing Hercules that really
gives us a scene from history we doesn't
mean we have any stories that were
written even with the author's intent of
describing a real historical figure as
opposed to preserving mythology or
telling a moral fable or serving some
other attention of the author but it is
very easy it is all too easy to slip
into a mentality of sifting through a
myth to pick out the portions that we
wish to imagine to be historical
evidence so what do I mean if you read a
collection of stories about Heracles
it's very easy to look at them and say
okay the most supernatural stories are
fiction and in certain stories the
supernatural elements and impossible
elements are exaggeration but that at
the core of the story the core which is
something we imagine something we
ascribe to the story it's not something
written in the story at the core of the
story there are real historical facts
that were later embellished upon
exaggerated about transformed into
legend and myth what have you today near
2015 some stories about Heracles are
still popular are still widely
remembered and others are virtually
fraud the death of Heracles the tragic
death of Heracles for some reason is not
popular is not widely remembered but
like most legendary figures in both most
major religious figures his death is
dramatic and you can describe his death
in practical terms you could omit
all of the supernatural material and
just say you know heraclea is cheated on
his wife he got a new girlfriend
his wife was jealous and his wife
poisoned him so he died now that sounds
like it could be an historical event and
it's very easy without even observing
your thought process for you to slip
into construing that myth as having
originally beam of having been at its
core a description of an actual king who
was poisoned by his wife who betrayed
his wife simply because that is
believable from our modern rational
scientific perspective now I can
describe the scene myth to you by
including and giving emphasis to the
supernatural elements which is that the
woman Heracles married was writing on
the back of a scent or and Heracles shot
the center with a bow while the center
was swimming through water and while the
center was dying as a dying curse the
center told Heracles his wife to collect
the blood from his wound and to use it
as a magical potion if Heracles his
heart should ever stray oh I may be
getting some of the details of that myth
wrong it's been many years since I read
the drama of the death of Heracles but
now instead this is obviously a richly
symbolic abstract mythological tale and
the intent of the author may be various
things it may be written primarily to
entertain children it may be written
primarily with a a religious purpose
encoded in religious symbolism we don't
know it may just be a legend for the
sake of a legend some of the stories we
tell action-adventure stories exist just
for the sake of the action-adventure but
now simply by shifting the focus info by
including these facts or were made
before it's not credible to say this
story began with
a real historical event and the other
elements arose as embellishments even if
we were willing to believe that there
were at some point magical creatures
called half-man half-horse creatures
that had poison for blood or something
considered from a historical position
the whole thing is preposterous and
doesn't seem reasonable that the author
is merely being inaccurate in recording
real historical events instead it seemed
to the author's intent has nothing to do
with recording history so this article I
wrote in 2012 which you as you'll see
brooches some of these same issues
within Buddhism where people are much
more defensive and much less willing to
discuss those questions in an open and
constructive way begins as follows
suppose someone formed their opinion of
Buddhism based solely on the articles on
my own blog a scenario only slightly
stranger than meeting someone whose
opinion of Buddhism is based entirely on
kung-fu movies and yet much less common
the question might then be asked given
all this supernatural material in the
Canon that you complained about other
Western interpreters selectively
ignoring etc why does anyone think of
these texts as records of his specific
historical events at all so that is the
question why do we read mythology and
think that we're seeing history our
local continues in a roundabout way
questions of that kind do reach me I
received an utterly unexpected response
from an established PhD wielding career
academic specialized in Buddhism who
felt that my work supported his own
conclusion the Palli Canon contained no
description of the Buddha as an
historical figure at all nor in this
professor's opinion did the text depict
him as a human being this was both
astounding and hilarious as I then had
to provide this professor with a link to
one of my prior articles in reply I had
already read an article titled the
Buddha was bold to discuss the
descriptions that we have in the Pali
Canon that do indeed make the Buddha
like a normal human being with nothing
Supernatural about his appearance etc I
have never heard back from that
professor again Socratic method is dead
apparently now it's worth noting this is
part of the hyper fragility of western
academia in dealing with Buddhism at the
very beginning of that anecdote I said
well in a roundabout way questions of
this kind you reach me they should reach
me directly it should be it should be
the case that we live in a world where
scholars deal with these questions
head-on that these are issues of real
debate original research a
reconsideration of the ancient texts
none of that's the case instead as in
this case I have been talking to this
professor about the possibility of my
getting a PhD studying with him and this
guy was so fragile so unprepared for any
discussion of historical texts and
evidence from historical texts that when
he told me his pet theory that the pali
canon doesn't describe the buddha as an
historical figure as a natural human
person he imploded as soon as i
mentioned a well well written fully
sighted fully referenced article to the
contrary i don't know any other field of
study that works that way you know i
don't know you can't be in a department
of physics and say to a student who's
applying to get a PhD with you an
advanced student who's applying to do
graduate work oh by the way here's my
here's my personal pet theory about the
speed of light and the student writes
back is okay well that's interesting but
actually I've published a theory to the
contrary and here are my source then
shut it down no obviously even in a
field like physics Socratic method is
important scrutiny and debate and
completing claims to the truth competing
source of factual evidence have to be
contrasted and that has to go on in the
study of ancient Greek and the study of
ancient Latin and the study of ancient
Sanskrit I would hope it goes on in the
study of medieval French
Italian 15th century Chinese in any
field but I got to tell you it is not
going on in Buddhist studies and this is
one of my main reasons for why I quit
that field and why I've now started at
you know chapter 1 page 1 with how to
learn Japanese it was not my dream in
life to become a scholar of modern
Japanese but having studied so many
other things that's the position I now
find myself in and it is frankly partly
due to the real failure of both Western
academia and Eastern academia in
Buddhist studies and these types of
hyper fragile attitudes of professors
who often are not capable of being
honest with themselves about what their
own beliefs were when they first got
started in Buddhism and how the
accumulated exposure they have to
historical evidence has challenged those
beliefs I will not say his name but
another professor a professor in England
he got started as a member of a
notorious cult in Buddhism a he was
involved with the Friends of the Western
Buddhist order headed by an infamous
white British monk who had numerous
charges of sexual misconduct against
them very well substantiated documented
in an article by The Guardian newspaper
and in other articles but in with that
professor obviously at every stage of
his involvement with Buddhism his
attitudes had to change at one point he
was a kid who didn't know that much who
got involved with this cult
aDNA whole he was when he got involved
at some point his opinion of that cult
changed I found just through Google I
found some of his comments in the
internet reflecting that time when he
was losing his faith in that modern cult
I don't know did he lose his faith in
the ancient religion also or but his
attitude must have changed and then he
must have gone through a series of
stages where in earning a PhD and in
reading these texts how you view
Buddhism at each stage of its historical
development has to change to quote the
infamous
Joseph Stalin quantitative build-up
leads to qualitative change when you
read just one myth you'll have a view of
it you'll have your opinion on that myth
you may have certain types of excuses in
mind and reading the myth like we just
talked about with Hercules where you're
sifting through the myth and choosing
some elements and treating them as
historical evidence and ignoring other
elements when you've read ten myths a
hundred myths a thousand myths your
perspective on each of them is different
your perspective on the whole is
different and your perspective on
different historical periods is
different you have to develop as an
intellectual now a lot of these
professors like the ones I just told the
standard about I think instead of trying
to cling into the jejune faith of their
lost youth they still want to believe
the things they believed as a teenager
or maybe that they believed in their
early 20s but that they can't believe
anymore because they know better and
that is very sad that's very tragic but
it's also very common to the religious
experience I think there are a lot of
people in Christianity who had maybe a
childlike faith in Jesus a childlike
faith in the Bible and when they were
teenagers and decided to go to a
seminary go to a religious College when
they decided to earn a PhD in biblical
studies they maybe still had this
childlike faith in these teenage
attitudes and then at some point as they
got older they hit a breaking point
where for example where you know so much
about the Bible that you can't believe
the Bible has supernatural origins you
have to believe the Bible is written by
human beings so do you go into a sort of
deeper denial or do you deal with that
and move on I certainly I mean unlike
Christianity
unlike Islam I certainly think it is
possible to be a good Buddhist and to be
a good Buddhist and to regard the
ancient texts as being merely the
product of human hands being written by
human beings and as containing many
errors and myths and fables
I the nature of the evidence frame one
is really read the stuff I don't know
what other option there is but yeah in
theory at least there are people who
literally believe in the supernatural
revelation of some Buddhist texts that
some of the Buddhist texts were brought
down from heaven by basically the Angels
working for Indra by supernatural forces
there are people who believe some
Buddhist texts were hidden in a cave by
magical dragons called Nagas and were
then revealed from that cave I if you
believe that as a child and then you
ever engage in textual study I I don't
see how any of those myths could be
sustainable and I don't see how any view
of the buddha as omniscient as god-like
could be sustainable if you're just
familiar with the diversity of texts
about them anyway sorry so we we
continue now with my old article
Socratic method is dead apparently we
should be debating these issues in
Western academia and we're not we should
be debating these issues in eastern
academia more not I'm not all that upset
about the failure of Western academia
because I'm more upset about the failure
of academia in places like Thailand
Japan Hong Kong Asia should be the home
of where original research on Buddhism
is being conducted and it's not so the
failure of Western Dvina is more
important because of the failure of
Eastern academia but believe me this
kind of Socratic discourse is not taking
place in journals of Buddhist studies
published in Japan I can make a whole
other video about my experiences with
studies journals of Buddhist studies in
based in Japan the question of whether
the Buddha is described as natural
supernatural or alternating between the
two is a fairly narrow issue we have a
broader problem in questioning his
status as an historical figure in any of
the texts or in accordance with any
possible archaeological evidence etc
even so the latter question is still
narrower than the universal problem of
why any one regards
any of the ancient texts as real
historical evidence as opposed to
religious fables and why other texts in
the same canon are disregarded as merely
fables in effect modern interpreters end
up selectively disregarding some text
while insisting on the importance of
others one of the real ghosts haunting a
popular flaw philology and I'll say that
again one of the great ghosts haunting
popular philology is the criterion of
embarrassment this is not a technical
concept its origin is in a book sold in
airport lobbies and it was neither
narrowly defined by academics nor by
religious authorities the criterion of
embarrassment comes from this guy will
Durant will do all and will Doron was
not a scholar of Buddhism he was not a
scholar of ancient Egypt he was not a
scholar of anything but he wrote popular
nonfiction nonfiction that was enormous
ly influential it sold in airport
lobbies it influenced you know BBC radio
in influence documentaries that were
recorded and played on the radio on
television it was massively influential
at that level of the popular mass media
consumption of history dumbed down
history and part of the problem is not
that it's dumbed down for the audience
but that the guy writing it really does
not know enough to be dumbing down
something as contentious as ancient
Buddhism and in this book I mean this
book it's not like it's 80% right and
20% wrong and misleading
it is 100% garbage but in books like
this by wielder all you see the
authoritative self-confident
presentation of modern myths about
Buddhism modern misconceptions not
misconceptions that come from ancient
texts but that people widely believe
today being presented as settled fact
this is from the 1950s but in the 1950s
there was already
we had a 100 year plus old tradition of
Europeans making up complete [ __ ]
about Buddhism and selling it to other
Europeans so in here I mean this also
contains a lot of propaganda for
Mohandas Gandhi the political leader in
India and so on I mean all all the kind
of [ __ ] hippy misconceptions about
the Orient about India China Buddhism
Hinduism etc you can find the the proof
the false proof for those notions in
this popular book in all the writings of
will Doron from the 1950s so again if
you know the popularity of that the type
of cultural influence that had it's not
at all surprising that views that were
prevalent in the 1960s were influenced
by this these books in the 1950s and
that did get recycled in documentaries
and what-have-you
okay but I'm specifically talking here
about will Durant's idea of the
criterion of embarrassment which again
was not really it wasn't a technical
scientific theological idea it was an
idea that came from these popular books
by this popular author who did not know
what he was talking about and who made
even more popular misconceptions about
ancient Egypt ancient India Buddhism
Hinduism you name it inspired a whole
lot of people to take vacations in India
I'm sure um I can use the same example
from the top of the video about the
death of Heracles the death Berkley's
it's very easy to think okay
Hercules was a real hero he was a strong
man who became a king by killing a lot
of people fought a lot of sword fights
and when he died when he was poisoned by
his wife his fans were embarrassed by
this they were trying to compensate for
this so they invented a myth
they embellished on the embarrassing
fact of his death so this is not
embarrassment in a kind of common sense
the point isn't the people were blushing
and covering their mouths and giggling
it's not embarrassment
about you know sexual material in in
mythology but this is construing the
myth as an attempt to compensate for an
inconvenient historical fact many people
think this way without realizing it very
easy to look at that myth of Heracles
and say okay there must have been a real
historical fact of him cheating on his
wife and being poisoned and then the
rest of the myth is to compensate for
that is to deal with that so-called
embarrassment so in terms of the
influences had this has been massively
influential in how all modern Western
people think about history of religion
many people are Meany old testament
notice
peculiar facts about Moses Moses in the
Old Testament in Judaism Moses cannot
speak well Moses has something like a
lisp or a stutter
Moses is described as having a a speech
pathology a speech problem so he's not a
public speaker many people look at that
and say okay that's an embarrassing fact
in this sense so the fact that the
mythology compensates for this problem
the fact that we have an explanation or
an excuse for this means that there was
a real historical fact there that's
being compensated for ie therefore Moses
is not a purely fictional or purely
mythological figure that therefore there
was a real person and this this
criterion of embarrassment the fact that
we can see a compensation for something
inconvenient for the storytellers must
entail that there was a real Moses now
that is false if you think about each
step of consideration there it is a
completely false inference that's
impossible to support that's not how we
establish the historical reality of a
person and if you apply that to
mythology or the well-written fiction
then almost any work of fiction becomes
historical reality because it is Nat
for people to create believable
obstacles believable character flaws in
their heroes even if you create a
completely fictional hero why does Robin
Hood lose in some of his battles Robin
Hood loses in his fight with Little John
they have a fight on the river isn't
this an embarrassment doesn't this show
that Robin Hood is a real historical
figure no not at all
even in works of pure fantasy even in
works of the wildest imagination in
fiction people create obstacles that the
heroes can't overcome people create
character flaws for mythological figures
and also we have to admit our own
alienness in the culture I do not know
enough about ancient Greek culture to
know why the story of the death of
Heracles was so meaningful and so
resonant what it reflected fanatically I
don't know that much about there about
the symbolism that may be involved in
the poisoning and so on so and there's a
certain arrogance if I as a modern
person look at that myth and say oh well
this can't possibly have any meaning
aside from being an attempt to embellish
a real historical event where a certain
king in ancient Greece was poisoned by
his wife over jealousy because the
husband had cheated on the wife that's a
modern that's kind of a modern hubris
look at it that way the type of
symbolism I mean the life of Moses in
the Old Testament if you spend a little
bit of time learning about First Temple
Judaism ancient Judaism you realize that
many of the events in the life of Moses
many the events of the life of Jesus are
really purely symbolic and they probably
were very meaningful the people who
wrote them at the time but they are not
meaningful to us in the same way Jesus
goes and visits a tree the tree doesn't
have any fruit when it's out of season
so Jesus asks God to destroy the tree
I'm not going to get into it here but
this is not an embarrassing incident
where a real historical person got angry
at a tree for having no fruit and said
that God should destroy the tree it is
an entirely symbolic Neher
that was meaningful to people at the
time and really reflects and concerns
political conditions in Israel at that
time the destruction of the temple Roman
occupation etc get to the politics of
the New Testament and what that reflects
what resonated about it um there's a lot
here is a lot to talk about but
unfortunately this idea of the criterion
of embarrassment was massively
influential because it was popularized
by this guy will durant who is now he's
not remembered in the same flattering
light that he was thought of during his
lifetime and look I'm gonna give one
concession sky I think his work is
complete garbage complete garbage but it
is true that he lived at a time when
most of the Western world was intensely
racist and intensely Pro Empire and even
in giving his work this sort of title
our Oriental heritage he is trying in
his way to make people in England and
America less racist less intolerant less
dismissive in their attitudes towards
religions like Buddhism and Hinduism so
in that respect yes his heart was in the
right place and yes I can see why the
BBC the CBC probably in America you know
the Disney Corporation why popular
purveyors of documentaries popularizing
history would fasten onto a book like
this and say yes this is just what we're
looking for this is just the flattering
view this is just the angle of the
history of India and history of China we
want to popularize basically to try to
make white people less racist basically
to try to make people who were raised in
a British or American education system
more sensitive to the idea that Asia has
its own written history its own
religions its own traditions that are
worth knowing about worth understanding
their own terms
that's it that's the only positive thing
I've said but we'll deraad everything he
says about Buddhism is garbage and it is
misleading and it's pernicious
and the legacy of that kind of writing
its influence is still with us today hmm
okay if you look around the internet for
debates employing the term employing the
idea of the criterion of embarrassment
you'll find that they both demonstrate a
diversity of implicit definitions of
what it means and you'll also see that
the authors often enough debate amongst
themselves the problem of how exactly
this criterion should be used I've heard
me
given that the term is legitimately
contestable in its meaning and it's
easier for me to give an example of how
it applies to Buddhist studies than it
is to define it Muhammad Allah no boy
I'm out of practice in pronouncing poly
maha Mogollon ah
hey-up and pronouncing japanese lightly
think about the list of languages of
studied since I stopped learning poly
I stopped learning pavley and I studied
Cree a little tiny bit of a jib way
Chinese and now Japanese I stay even
more languages before that I worked on
Palli Cambodian French German etc but
let me tell you to say I'm rusty on poly
is an understatement
anyway Mahama galena is the name of a
Buddhist monk and I am NOT correctly
pronouncing the long a vowels here
Mogollon uh yeah you're not gonna chant
along with this video anyway mmm
Mohammed gana was one of two monks who
were expected to inherit the leadership
of Buddhism as they then new religion at
the time of the Buddha's death Kayson
paused to be clear when the Buddha was
alive he selected two monks and said
these are my two chief disciples these
are the best monks however you want to
phrase it and the Buddha said that when
he died these two monks should take over
the leadership of Buddhism and obviously
while the Buddha was still alive the
idea of what Buddhism was supposed to be
was still to some extent open and in
contested and new right admittedly I'm
presuming the Buddha is a real
historical figure who really was alive
in my description of these events
and some of you might challenge me on
that okay Socratic method is dead
despite the fact that both of these
monks were younger than the Buddha they
both pre deceased him and Mahama galinha
was reportedly murdered okay so this is
massively significant for the history of
Buddhism or even for the mythology of
Buddhism if you regard this as
containing no real historical facts but
we have here the inconvenient fact that
the two monks the Buddha selected to
become the leaders after his death they
died before the Buddha died even though
they were younger than the Buddha okay
in many ways I think the tension
surrounding this story is much more
meaningful than the sort of tension
surrounding Moses why was it Moses was
never allowed to see the promised land
why was it that Moses couldn't speak I
couldn't speak clearly
why was the succession the control of
the leadership of Buddhism contested at
the time of the death of the Buddha why
was it disputed who would inherit
control of Buddhism the texts concerning
Muhammad gana are full of the magical
and the supernatural and the events
surrounding his death are further
embellished upon in the commentaries so
for those you don't know there's the
original ancient pally texts and then
there are later texts called the
commentaries that is not debated the
fact that the commentaries are written
historically later is not debated that
is as close to an undisputed historical
fact as anything gets in Buddhism so
difference between text and commentary
the Pali text and then the commentaries
are also written in Pali but there's
there are big differences between the
two
modern readers tend to regard the death
of Muhammad Ilana as an historical fact
even if they regard all the stories told
about it as mythology how is that
possible if your only evidence is myth
why would you suppose that you have
evidence of anything other than
mythology well there is this dubious
thing called the criterion of
embarrassment in general modern readers
suppose that the untimely death of both
of the monks who had been appointed to
inherit authority was a subject of
embarrassment in the particular sense
that required further explanation and
justification even if the myths are
largely fiction modern readers tend to
suppose that the reason for creating the
myth was real the supposition is that a
story needed to be invented to explain
away and it can be in fact however this
whole attitude remains one of
supposition departing from the text
again we also have this problem of
hubris that we as modern readers really
know the the undeclared intention of the
author's here so if the story concerning
the circumstances of Muhammad Ana's
death the death of this monk if that is
an invention to conceal something to
serve some other purpose how do we know
what's being concealed how do we know
what the author's intent was if we're
even assuming that this is a real
historical fact that this death this
murder took place well you know to give
one example that again we should have
debate about we should have Socratic
discourse about the the story we have
the legend of the death that we have
blames the giant religion which is also
pronounced the Jain religion today j.a I
am so the Giants are blamed for the
murder of this important monk well there
was real religious tension real conflict
between Buddhism and Jainism as two
religions in this period in the same
historical period in India how do we
know this story wasn't invented just for
sectarian reasons just because the
author the person who wrote it was a
part of a real contest a real car
between these two religions that's just
a supposition that's just a modern
thesis
however it's not easily dismissed
no likewise the idea that the story
around his death was invented for any
other reason for example someone might
have created this myth just to explain
why when the Buddha died Mahama gana did
not become the leader of Buddhism that
as the texts indicate there was some
kind of struggle to control the Buddhist
religion at this crucial juncture and
the person who won that struggle was not
the person the Buddha selected well he
would be convenient to say oh that's
because he was murdered and he was
murdered by a rival religious order by
the Giants by China's him so that's also
convenient but we don't know and the
accounts of his death are supernatural
they are just as impossible to believe
as the death of Heracles there's enough
supernatural stuff involved that nobody
could read that and possibly believe
this is an eyewitness account of a real
historical fact now also if you read
that story I'm not gonna get to the
details it's not even clear who could
have witnessed it because nobody is
there and he magically teleports and
it's like so who's telling the story and
who was it who witnessed these
impossible events to tell the story
given that he's alone when these things
happen and the magic involved so you get
into kind of surreal self contradictory
logic even if you want to believe that
it's a real historical event okay we're
turning to the text here many people who
don't use the term criterion of
embarrassment nevertheless share in this
basic attitude towards textual evidence
and many people complain that the word
embarrassment itself is poorly suited to
the meaning of the phrase and is an
unwanted distraction etc the point here
isn't that ancient Buddhists were
embarrassed for the death of Mohammed
Mohammed Amin itself rather the
assumption is that modern readers can
infer that the invention of the myth
served as a type of compensation for a
real historical event
and that we can further infer what that
real event was that the authors are
compensating for it all seems so obvious
and yet it is really very dubious was
Muhammad gana really murdered by Giants
if we have a myth stating that he was
couldn't his texts reflect tensions
between the two religions Buddhism
versus Jainism at the time of the myths
authorship rather than recording a prior
historical event can we really
selectively disregard supernatural
elements of a story that would tend to
categorize it as myth simply because
there were other 'mo elements that seem
to us with modern eyes to indirectly
reveal real events
could it be conversely that these myths
cover over something completely
different that we can't guess at from
the mere supras supposition that
something is concealed hey sorry I
tripped on the word supposition there so
again coming back to an example like the
myths around Moses or Jesus praying for
the destruction of the fruit tree a very
small number of biblical scholars have
unpacked the symbolism from that culture
at that time the implied meaning and the
significance of of those events of
course they're still debated and
disputed but the point is a normal
modern person reading in English English
translation could not read those myths
about Moses and Jesus and understand the
ancient Jewish cultural assumptions and
social conditions what have you that
surround the myth and that inform the
author's purpose and that really reveal
to you the significance of the myth so
with some areas of ancient Buddhist
texts these are also real stumbling
blocks where sometimes we have a story
but we don't know why the story is being
told or what it's hinting at sometimes
we have a criticism of another religion
but we don't really know what's being
criticized or why throughout the pally
can and you know the Sun worshipers
people who worship the Sun they have a
really bad reputation
I've never seen an explanation
within the Canon for why for what was
the problem and I don't know why maybe
in that period in India the Sun
worshipers were engaging in some sort of
rituals that were extremely offensive to
Buddhists whether animal sacrifice
rituals or human sacrifice or sex which
I don't know but there are some cases
where the texts preserve evidence of a
religious and cultural nature that I
have no further way to interpret okay so
these are the ways in which even a very
simple text can be complicated you know
that scene in the New Testament with
Jesus condemning the fruit tree it's
only a few sentences long it's not
involuted it's not it's not complex when
you look at on the page in English but
to understand what's going on there why
the myth exists and what it's trying to
tell the reader in the period it was
originally written what it's trying what
it means in that context that is
complicated so we can have some of the
same problems in looking at ancient
Buddhist texts could it be conversely
that these myths cover over something
completely different that we can't guess
at from the mere supposition that
something is being concealed human
nature being what it is we might say at
least hypothetically that there could
have been a power struggle to determine
who inherited control the religion
around the time of the Buddha's death as
such it could be that the myth isn't
concealing the Incan inconvenient fact
of Mahatma Gandhi's death but instead
that it's concealing the convenient fact
that the death itself was a myth if we
started from the skeptical assumption
that Muhammad olanna might not have been
dead prior to the Buddha's death we
would then interpret the written myths
as offering an explanation of his
absence
ie his exclusion from power thereafter
that would be wholly speculative however
the problem with the criterion of
embarrassment is that every theory it
supports is wholly speculative we cannot
reduce the degree of speculation even if
we employ Occam's razor there is
absolutely no reason why the simplest
available explanation for the invention
would be more true than a convoluted one
so pause here this also relates to the
nature of concealment
if you know I'm lying to you if you know
I'm concealing evidence about something
then there's no reason to assume that my
reason for lying will be the simplest
reason possible quite the contrary
my reasons may be complex so if a myth
is not written for sincere and direct
reasons if it's not telling us what it
openly and overtly and directly is
telling us then the simplest explanation
is irrelevant why did people write this
myth about Jesus damming a fruit tree
asking God to blight to destroy a fruit
tree the point was not to tell us that
you can have the magical superpower to
destroy a fruit tree the actual point is
convoluted is complicated it's not the
simplest available explanation cuz
that's how we thought she works and you
know again it might have been simpler
obvious to the audience that it was
written for in that historical period
but I mean likewise even if you read
Shakespeare sometimes the joke in
Shakespeare like there's a concealed
joke
it's very convoluted it's very difficult
to explain today what the joke is it was
obvious to some people in the audience
at that time but the symbolic references
the cultural references that have been
forgotten today so you can't use Occam's
razor for this sort of thing now there
is an overall sense in which we do use
Occam's razor
when we look at the historical figure of
the Buddha you have to ask what is the
simplest explanation is it simpler to
imagine that ultimately there was an
historical figure or is it simpler to
imagine there never was an historical
figure and these myths were created
without a unique person existing to
inspire the mythology
most people who have profound long-term
exposure these ancient texts tend to say
yeah it's easier to assume there really
was a guy ultimately who inspired this
literature and that some of his
idiosyncrasies some of his personal
decisions are reflected in the
literature that we have
although the mythology about him is very
indirect was there an historical
Herakles was there an historical
evolution Tess Farah so aval oka tetra
is another Buddhist God and we know for
a fact that this God never existed as a
person the origins of that God are
symbolic and abstract so even then even
with this type of very basic theory such
as the Buddha was a person it seems like
an incredibly simple theory actually
Occam's razor is irrelevant actually the
question of what we do with mythological
evidence is very complicated and
difficult
unlike the pure sciences or even the
Medical Sciences neither mythology nor
history are susceptible to Occam's
favorite famous principle the simplest
explanation for why Napoleon went to war
with Russia may be utterly false his
reasons may have been extremely
convoluted etc and the simplest
explanation for various myths that have
been made up about the ensuing war may
also be false propaganda isn't counted
as one of the pure Sciences right so
that's a good point I forgot that I made
what I've just said about history what
have you said about mythology is also
true of history we can't make Occam's
razor inferences about historical
decisions that we know are real
historical decisions any more than we
can of a mythological decisions why did
President Nixon decide to continue with
the Vietnam War the reasons may be
really complicated and the fact that you
can come up with a very simple
explanation single reason at a single
time may be completely irrelevant
so we can't these types of inferences do
apply to the pure sciences but do not
apply to mythology religion history
politics given that we're looking at an
uncertain mix of mythology in history
the principle of parsimony is doubly
misleading so the principle of parsimony
is another name for Occam's razor
unlike the laws of physics were
investigating a story that intentionally
conceals something the motives of the
authors may be complex we don't even
know to what extent they regarded
themselves as writing fact fiction or a
mixture of the two so again this is why
the intention of the author is so
important when you read an ancient Greek
author like Thucydides we know that his
intention was to get rid of mythology we
know that he was trying to write real
history and real record real political
decisions and political facts but when
you're looking at mythology that may
have been written mostly to entertain
children or may be written in order to
inspire a certain type of ethical
lifestyle or just to inspire people to
care about certain rituals so they know
the importance of performing magical
rituals the intention of the author is
not to record an historical fact in the
21st century if it were to speculate as
the inspiration for a particular songs
lyrics the simplest explanation has no
reason to be more true than a convoluted
one and looking for historical facts
that may be masked within a work of art
simplicity need not correlate to
accuracy although simplicity may make
our analysis seem more logical our
conclusions are not any less speculative
for that reason so anyone who has a
background in art history would know
sometimes the reason why a painting was
created and the symbolic meaning of
features and paintings can be extremely
complicated and direct if you are
looking at a painting that has a
concealed or hidden message and
sometimes by the way paintings the the
hidden message is just to thank the
donor to thank the patrons thank the
people who paid for the painting but it
can be very convoluted returning to the
question that opened the essay why does
anyone regard any of this stuff as
historical evidence of anything at all
well as a broad aesthetic tendency I
think that most of us ie modern readers
really do share in the mentality of the
criterion of embarrassed
and the canonical text offer us various
critical and self-critical remarks about
the imperfect development of early
Buddhism that seemed all too easy to
believe in it isn't the case that all of
the monks in the canon are Paragons of
virtue instead we have many acrimonious
dialogues preserved in which the monks
disagree of a philosophy or sometimes
accuse one another of ethical lapses and
moral misconduct so again I just pause
this is the sense in which many people
who read the parody Canon feel that it
is much more historically authentic than
the Old Testament of the New Testament
just the human fallibility the human
imperfection of many of the characters
the fact that you see Buddhist monks
criticizing and complaining about other
buddhist monks you see Buddhist monks
going and complaining to the Buddha this
monk is a jerk this monk is doing
something bad so again as with the the
case of Moses stuttering are not being
able to speak clearly those types of
human and professions very often have an
effect on the readers of convincing them
that these books as a whole are
recording historical facts as I've
already said that is very misleading and
it's not appropriate to let yourself
fall into those assumptions in an
unexamined way you have to be rigorous
and self disciplined in your evaluation
the evidence so I write here there is no
real reason why we should regard a story
about a bad monk as more historically
real than a story about a good monk but
this is a natural human bias if I read a
story in the newspaper about a corrupt
politician I am probably going to
believe it
simply because it seems plausible to me
that the politician is corrupt if I read
a story in the newspaper telling me that
a certain politician is a paragon of
virtue he is not corrupt in any way he's
completely honest he's completely
accountable and he's doing a great job I
will most likely disregard that or be
very skeptical or critical so this is a
bias on the part of the reader and both
of those newspaper stories may be
entirely true or accurate both of them
may be false and misleading
okay so when we look at the Pavley
cannon why do we assume that stories
about bad monks are accurate and stories
about good monks our mythology or
propaganda or misleading whatever okay
we should be aware of this tendency of
thought that elects to do precisely that
we tend to teach em pardon me we tend to
treat text as factual if they contain
criticism self-criticism
conflict and explanations for what
seemed to be inconvenient facts we tend
to regard the absence of these things in
an otherwise grandiose narrative as
mythical if the Canon described everyone
as levitating and radiating magical
beams all the time etc nobody today
would believe any of it nobody would
really be interested in it and the whole
Canon would probably be thought of as
quite boring in contrast to the human
drama of other ancient sources such as
the myth of Heracles however the Pali
Canon does preserve very down-to-earth
reflections on the state of the religion
alongside the supernatural narratives
and sometimes mixed in with them
indifferently this is the sense in which
Buddhism is frankly more interesting
than the myths of Heracles the religion
was intensely aware of its own
corruption from the outset and it was
intensely concerned with a
misunderstanding of its own philosophy
even within its first group of core
followers the Canon preserves a record
of many of those concerns debates
complaints remonstration etc although
these are not separate from the
mythological material in the texts
themselves and they definitely do not
comprise an earlier stratum whereby
anyone could or should disregard the
mythological material as later strata
more fundamentally we should admit to
ourselves that we have no clear
criterion as to what may be called a
myth anyway nor of how or why anything
should be separated out from the text as
a non myth
instead readers just operate on the
basis of their own sentiment and
something like the criterion of
embarrassment returning to the question
of who inherited power at the time of
the Buddha's death
look very briefly at the example of maha
kassapa whereas the two months
sorry pregnant whereas the two monks
appointed to inherit power did not do so
reportedly due to their untimely demise
Casa fo was the man who actually did
take over control of the religion was he
appointed to do so from the Buddha's
deathbed no reportedly he wasn't present
however as the myth goes in the
mahaparinirvana sutra which is a certain
within the palate cannon isa tanta
within this corpus of ancient text the
fact that he was intended to take over
the leadership was indicated magically
by the fact that the wood stacked up for
the buddha's funeral pyre refused to
burn until maha kassapa
arrived to attend the funeral no i'm not
making this up
the question is who did and why okay now
i'm going to presume that my audience
does not believe that divine
intervention actually prevented the wood
from lighting on fire which is what the
texts say is that the gods plural the
gods of ancient india the gods would not
allow the buddha's funeral pyre his
funeral ritual to proceed until maha
kassapa came and took over the
leadership that doesn't just sound like
a myth it sounds like an excuse and a
bad excuse the more you know about what
ism it would be much more convenient if
while the buddha was dying he said that
he wanted maha kassapa to come to his
funeral or if the buddha said that he
wanted mikasa to become the leader of
the religion but the buddha did not say
that we don't have a myth anywhere with
the buddha endorsing the leadership maha
kassapa instead we have the Buddha
endorsing the leadership of two other
people who did not become the leaders
now finally I mean again you may or may
not know Buddhism as well
what Buddhism is based on the
instructions of the Buddha ET is not
based on the instructions of the gods
the gods plural the gods do say things
the gods do also have debates with the
but uh another Buddhist monks there are
interactions with the gods but what the
whole pali canon denies is that the gods
know anything that's really worth
knowing
so Brahma is spoken to but it's very
explicitly said in the pala Canon that
Brahma doesn't know something that the
Buddha doesn't know Brahma and Indra
they don't seem to know anything that
intelligent human beings would not know
so in that sense they're similar to the
gods of ancient Greece they're not
omnipotent and omniscient they are
super-powered like our comic book
characters like superheroes today they
can fly through the air and they can
kill you by throwing a lightning bolt at
your head
Indra actually does that in the pally
Canon by the way he throws lightning
bolts at people's heads and kills them
once in a while um but Buddhism is
absolutely not based on revealed
principles or instructions from the gods
it is based exclusively on the field
principles instructions from the Buddha
so even if the gods did choose maha
kassapa to be the leader and they did
this through the incredibly indirect
method of preventing a fire from being
lit not a very impressive form of divine
intervention that would still not be
valid in Buddhism there is no way that
succession or monastic leadership even
today even in Buddhism as it exists now
you are not supposed to select your
leaders on the basis of divine
intervention or funeral rituals or
magical fire lighting rituals this is
one of the differences between Buddhism
and other religions how leadership is
selected by the way for a monks who are
still alive today or for people in the
last 1,000 years there are some very
boring texts you can read that outlined
the sort of legal principles of who is
in charge when and who makes
what decisions in a Buddhist Sangha in a
Buddhist religious community either
immense religious community or women's
religion many in a monastic group okay
so this myth apart from being
preposterous and seeming to conceal
something is also doctrinally invalid
which is to say even if we are
completely uncritical pure believers
true believers in all the magical and
supernatural elements of Buddhism it's
still not valid for the gods to have
made this decision that they allegedly
made funny Oh divine intervention is so
so often through invisible and
suspicious means I'm okay yes
theoretically it is possible that this
is an actual historical event but I
don't think that anyone alive today
interprets the text in this manner not
even the most pious of monks and I've
met many conversely if the point of the
myth were to legitimate the power of
maha kassapa
the question deserves to be asked why
didn't someone simply fabricate a
decision on the part of the Buddha on
his deathbed saying that cassava should
take over control of the religion it may
also be noted that the wood and the pyre
does not speak with its own voice
another important monks a sermon partly
another important monk Aniruddha offers
the explanation that the gods were
preventing the fire from alighting until
cassava could arrive so again we don't
even have a myth of Indra coming down
from the sky and delaying the funeral
ritual we just have another human being
a monk named a Neruda standing there and
saying no no you can't light the fire
until this other monk arrives and takes
over the leadership of the religion okay
so yeah the story of divine intervention
very much seems like an embellishment on
a very believable scenario of a power
struggle for who should attend the
funeral probably who should preside over
the rituals of the funeral at the
the Buddha's death and ultimately who
would be present to debate and decide
who was going to take over the
leadership of this new religion right
again it is tempting to imagine that
this myth preserves anniver to support
for maha kassapa inheriting power and
that it is indirectly depicting the fact
that a Narada wanted to delay the
funeral proceedings and tell Kasbah and
his supporters could arrive to advocate
for his leadership however we don't know
this it is speculation of the crudest
kind my cassava isn't even mentioned in
the text so the Martina Bannister that
is the text until after the Buddha's
death he enters the narrative with the
description of his absence explained in
reference to this issue of the funeral
pyre remaining mysteriously
flame-retardant
conversely sari put the one of the monks
who definitely wasn't appointed to
inherit power so sorry put that is one
of the two monks the Buddha named so far
only named the other monk commercially
sorry puts out one of the two monks who
definitely was appointed to inherit
power is mentioned in the same text as
speaking to the Buddha shortly prior to
the Buddha's death yet more than three
months before apparently when the Buddha
is still in Nalanda so in Congress Li we
have the Buddha praising the wisdom of
sari pata as part of the Buddha's death
narrative and then sari put the simply
disappears in the story with no mention
of the fact that he was supposed to take
over the leadership nor any statements
of the Buddha's disappointment that this
wouldn't happen
sariputta isn't mentioned again neither
as alive nor dead nor dying nor is he
present at the funeral nor is his
absence of the funeral mentioned as
significant meanwhile Mahama galinha
isn't mentioned even once in the whole
story although he was the other man
appointed to inherit the leadership and
he allegedly died subsequent to sari put
up but still prior to the put Kay
this is complicated especially if you're
not a scholar of ancient Buddhist texts
if you are a scholar of interpreters
texts this is pretty simple the point is
look reading this text this famous text
the Mahabharata bonus is that reading
the description of the Buddha's death
these elements don't make sense and
please understand I'm not evaluating
this text as having supernatural origins
I am reading this text as something
written by human beings who sat down and
tried to write a legend tried to write a
coherent story surrounding the
circumstances of the Buddha's death and
indeed what happened to the religion who
inherited power who took over once the
buddha had died these are themes dealt
with but in looking at that story it is
not actually compatible with the
explanations or excuses we have for why
Buddhism was not led by the two people
the Buddha appointed as leaders instead
it seems like this legend the
description of the death of my partner
been asserted that this legend was not
even aware of the excuses that people
made up including the claims that both
of the people selected to be the leaders
the religion were already dead on the
contrary with sorry put this case it
very much seems in the text if you just
read the text not the commentary the
original Pali text it very much seems
that sorry put is still alive he's there
and the Buddha talks to him a very short
time before his death and if sorry put
the had suddenly died and the Buddha was
aware of it if Muhammad oh and I had
suddenly died if the two people you've
appointed to inherit the control their
religion if they had died the Buddha
would have discussed that or addressed
that in this exact context so it's
suspicious and well I do not want to
give in to Occam's razor one explanation
for the aspects of these texts plural
that are incoherent that don't match up
is that Buddhists were having a
difficult time giving a cohere
accounts of what happened when
leadership was taken over at the
Buddha's death that mythology such as
the gods preventing the funeral pyre
from being lit was added to this story
in order to make a more pleasing
coherent legendary mythological
narrative I would have some somewhat
inconvenient and confusing facts that
people are still somewhat in denial
about today I might think in terms of
the chronology wasn't sorry put that's
supposed to be dead all along in
retrospect we are supposed to believe
that both sorry pizza and Mohammed
McGowan ah died just a few months before
the Buddha's own funeral and that news
of the shocking turn of events reached
the Buddha and yet their death their
deaths are not mentioned within the same
text if all of those deaths transpired
in such rapid succession within the last
three months of the Buddha's life why
would there be absolutely no mention of
such an important drama in the midst of
the very myth that details the last
three months of the Buddha's life
so again if the if the text if the
legend even said oh wow isn't this
amazing isn't this surprising or
inconvenient that all three of these
people died at the same time that would
be another story but it doesn't do that
it doesn't even acknowledge this so the
the pieces do not seem to match up okay
these were the it would be it would be
big news it would be big shocking news
if these two guys had died one of them
murdered one of them died of from from
murder at exactly this point in time the
history religion it would be a big deal
and the at least would have mentioned
the fact that they were not attending
the funeral because in theory you could
say well maybe the Buddha didn't know
about it yet although the Buddha is
supposed to be omniscient and have
magical psychic powers to know these
things know exactly these kind of things
to know about the deaths of Buddhist
monks even cheap nirvana supposed to be
aware of this stuff but anyway on a more
humanistic level you could say well
maybe they didn't know well definitely
at the funeral and
the council the the proceedings that
been afterwards definitely would have
been known and talked about at that time
and we have a very difficult to account
for silence okay these were the two
chief disciples of the Buddha who were
supposed to be in command after the
Buddha's death are we expected to
imagine that their own deaths are simply
omitted as unimportant from this
narrative why would it not be mentioned
it seems almost irresistible to imagine
that we can unravel what the myth means
and also what it conceals the truth is
that we can't we don't know whether or
not it was written to conceal anything
and we can never verify what it is
concealing in particular if these myths
were written to serve a simple political
purpose maha kassapa would instead be
mentioned in the Buddha's final orations
and he would be unambiguously named as
the intended successor throughout the
Canon but he isn't instead
the Canon preserves an incongruous and
ambiguous situation at the time of the
Buddha's death despite the mythological
and grandiose tropes that are built into
the narrative nobody who studies the
Pali Canon as a whole could have the
sense that Maha Kaba firstly that maha
kassapa succession was obvious or
uncontroversial sorry to repeat that
nobody who studies these texts as a
whole would have the feeling that maha
cassavas leadership was something
obvious uncontroversial that happened by
default on the contrary we have
indications that know this this was
controversial and this was not what the
Buddha planned and we know the Buddha's
opinion of each of these monks and of
controversies accusations made against
maha kassapa
we have some very interesting fragments
of disputes shall we say which again
leads us to think that these are real
historical events because of the
prejudice I mentioned earlier when we
read a newspaper story about a corrupt
politician we tend to believe it and we
tend to be skeptical about a story that
a politician is completely blameless and
faultless and wonderful so these very
fragments of accusations and
counter-accusations give us the feeling
that we're looking at an imperfect
record of real
Oracle events even though that same
record contains completely magical stuff
like the Buddha flying up into the sky
and radiating flames out of his body and
monks going and talking to Brahma and
Indra and in this case a very modest
form of divine intervention in the gods
preventing a fire from being lit mmm
we're left with fragments of many
strange controversies and that
inescapable feeling that we're looking
at an imperfect record of real
historical events even though we're only
looking at myths that we supposed to
very indirectly reflect those events
within the Pella Canon Maya cusp emerges
as a very interesting and very human
character who deserves to be written
about a greater length and I would do
here maha kassapa offers some of us
sorry
maha kassapa offers us some of the most
striking examples of descent from the
top within the Canada he complains very
directly about what he perceives to be
wrong and corrupt within the religion
this also tugs at our sense of the
criterion of embarrassment although we
really have no evidence at all the
nature of the complaints themselves just
seems so human and so believable that we
easily take them as indirect evidence of
something actual so again why is there
no Socratic discourse well that's why is
there no really legit but a scholarship
discussing this stuff we actually do
have evidence that maha kassapa had his
own ideas about what the Buddhists what
the Buddhist religion should be even
while the Buddha was still alive and
then obviously if he took over
leadership he would have informed and
reformed and influenced what the
religion became so we should have
evidence within the Canon from within
that period of time of how maybe the
religion was different under the
leadership of kassapa and under the
leadership of the Buddha and I think we
do I think we actually can look through
the text and find the influence of
various monks nah there were probably
only a few examples but yeah we do have
a sense of different personalities
different priorities different religious
ideas and
different ideas about monastic
discipline monastic rules monastic
practice and we concede of some extent
different human influences tugging at
the legacy of Buddhism during the
formative period when people were first
creating the code of what Buddha what
Buddhism would become what Buddhism
should become and one of the reasons for
that by the way is that all these people
were members of different religions
before if you had been Hindu before
converting to Buddhism you would have a
different set of cultural assumptions
about monasticism about the religious
life then someone who converted from
Jainism someone who converted from a an
animist religion from sun-worshipping
from worshipping spirits that are in the
trees and the rivers and again if you've
read the pala Canon you see that kind of
diversity there was tremendous diversity
in the ethnicities languages religious
backgrounds of the people who first
joined Buddhism during the first
generation of followers their religion
had so naturally around the time of the
death of Buddhism competing notions of
how the religion should operate would be
contested and also these are these are
going to be eccentric people you can see
within the Canon some of them really
believe very strongly in supernatural
experiences they believed in seeing
ghosts in seeing demons in communicating
with ghosts and demons and that material
is preserved in the Pali Canon and there
were other people who were authors
contributing to Pella Canon who were of
a more skeptical and scientific mindset
so you see those contrasts within the
Canon you even see some people who were
skeptical about meditation and
meditative revelation or experience and
of course there are other authors who
were not skeptical at all who were
enthusiastic in the religious sense so
yeah the Canon the written Canon is a
mixed bag because it preserves these
kinds of contrasts and debates that were
ongoing at religion at the time when
everything got written down and declared
to be holy and impossible to change
however other forms of Buddhism like my
anabolism
did make changes they did continue to
make changes and they basically
ultimately ignored the written canon and
invented a totally new religion in China
in Tibet in what's now Afghanistan and
of course in Japan so spoilers um one of
the most interesting complaints offered
to the Buddha was in the sadhana pottery
route Picasa tanta as I mentioned my
ability to pronounce poly has gotten a
bit rusty you can see the original
article to get the correct spelling of
the name of that Setanta and the
textural edition anyway in this
Siddhanta Mahapatra klein of the
religion still within the lifetime of
its founder and i say here see the poly
tacks displayed in the first
illustration so again these complaints
about the corruption of buddhism already
existed apparently while the buddha was
still alive but at any rate while the
ancient texts were still being written
so you know it's like you found a new
political party but within 10 years or
20 years you already have problems of
corruption you can have problems of
political corruption when you start a
new religion within the first one year
I'm you know within the first ten years
no problem sure so anyway but that is
that type of debate is preserved in the
canon and maha kassapa
is a critic we have him complaining and
resting he's a critic who took over the
leadership dissent from the top in the
past he complains the number of rules
was few but the number of monks who
became properly trained was many now by
contrast there are many rules but few of
the monks are really becoming
accomplished in the training okay so
this pause this is interesting so this
would give us the belief that maha
cassava was of the of the school of
thought that buddhism should not have an
elaborate legal code describing in many
many rules what monks can and cannot do
and that's what we do have now even in
tera vaada buddhism we have specific
can you wear shoes when you can and
can't wear shoes but generally it's
ain't the whole religion is very easy
shoe believe it or not there are some
exceptions you can wear boots in the
cold maybe about not using an umbrella
about whether or not you can talk to
someone who is carrying a sword who is
wearing a sword
there are many minut and particular
circumstances that this legal code
covers exactly what a monk should do if
he is seduced by a beautiful woman under
what circumstances and tremendous detail
but anyway this is an interesting text
because it suggests that maha kassapa
was of a more anti-illegal bent that you
know he was interested in virtue not
legislation we know from other textual
sources also that some of the monks felt
that the the minor rules should be
abolished that basically there should be
major rules you know like don't kill
anyone etc there should be a shorter
list of rules for monks but that
following the Buddha's instructions that
the more trivial and detailed rules
should be taken away but that did not
happen that side lost the debate so that
arrested I mean if anyone was doing
legitimate scholarship on Buddhism and
there were real free intellectual
discourse we would have Socratic debate
about the stuff we would have Sakura we
would have contrasting views between
professors and students and Buddhist
monks and we would have progress and we
would have exciting new research on
ancient Buddhist philosophy and we would
have original modern philosophy inspired
by and appropriating from Buddhism but
doing new and different things from it
because believe me the future of
Buddhism is not going to be worshipping
indra and his council of gods on the top
of Mount Meru some aspects of Buddhist
philosophy are still inspiring and
important today and others are not
people are not going to go back to
worshiping Indra and the people who are
attracted to Buddhism today are normally
people who are rejecting either
Christianity or Hinduism or some other
religion
and they're not getting involved with
Buddhism because they want to worship
Indra the same way they formally worship
some other God so it is what it is so in
the past he complains the number of
rules was few but the number of monks
who became properly trained was many now
by contrast there are many rules but few
of the monks are really becoming
accomplished in the training
this is descent from the top one of the
foremost monks and the one monk who
eventually took over the leadership of
the religion it's complaining that the
rules don't work that is a fundamental
challenge to Buddhist orthodoxy to
Buddhist Manasses this is not trivial if
you care about doctrine if you care
about history the religion Buddhism is a
religion built on rules the complaint
against the prolix monastic code from
one of its foremost proponents is
significant the fact that the Canon
preserves dissent of this kind mixed in
with supernatural narratives all the
rest of it is even more significant this
is a religion that preserve dissent as
part of its Bible including some of the
reasons that would be convert stated for
rejecting the teaching of the Buddha the
words of ex monks who formerly accepted
but later rejected the teaching as well
as the arguments of rival philosophers
who criticize the Buddha as in the case
of mahakasyapa we even have evidence of
dissent from the top so is this stuff
historical evidence of anything at all
in general the people sorry in general
people answer that question in
accordance with their own evaluation of
human nature although it is easy to
imagine that a religion would invent
myths to glorify itself it simply seems
difficult to imagine that they would
invent myths to criticize themselves
within their own Canon conversely there
is absolutely no distinction between
myth and historical fact within the
texts of the core Canon as I choose to
put it and we need to be keenly aware of
the subjective and emotional nature of
the decisions we make in disregarding
some Texas fictional and in a store is
store sizing others treat
historical evidence period that's the
end of the article but the sad fact is
in closing this monologue I've got to
refer you back to the anecdote at the
beginning of the article which is that
it was impossible for me to even have a
completely respectable completely
academic debate with a university
professor of Buddhism about the
descriptions of the Buddha's physical
appearance which is not that
philosophical it's is just not that big
a deal nobody cared that much about
whether the Buddha was dark-skinned or
light-skinned or tall or short but it is
interesting that we do have texts
describing the Buddha as a human being
and what do you look like to some extent
um many people observed that the New
Testament takes almost no interest in
what Jesus looked like the Old Testament
takes almost no interest in what Moses
look like but yeah we do have some
descriptions of the Buddha as a normal
human being not as having fantastic
supernatural features in his appearance
as being indistinguishable from other
monks and so on we know some things
about this new beggar
but in the 21st century it is impossible
for me to even even with my background
even with properly cited sources from
primary source texts even when I've
already done the hard work as a scholar
it's impossible for me to even have a
conversation with about that with a
white Canadian professor of Buddhism
that's how fragile these people are and
these institutions are for dealing with
the discussions that inevitably arise
from the honest and open examination of
the historico evidence so given that
example at the start of this article
obviously we are not making progress and
we are never going to make progress in
the re-evaluation of the poly canon
as historical tax it's very sad I lost I
don't know ten years of my life or more
as a scholar of Buddhism I did a lot of
other stuff during those ten years also
if you look at my resume I had quite a
few interesting jobs I lived in
addressing places I lived interesting
life at the humanitarian work I got out
and saw the world or at least one very
interesting part of it in Cambodia Laos
Yunnan etc but yes Socratic method is
dead and the sudo discipline of Buddhist
studies of academic but ology is
profoundly unprepared to deal with the
types of really fascinating and
compelling issues that arise out of
reading these texts that's why I quit
now I've got to get back to doing my
Japanese 101 homework